Final Project Proposal
================

## Group Members

Jerri Chen (jc4166)  
Lisa Eisler (ldl2113)  
Katherine Dimitropoulou (kd2524)

## Project Title

Pre-operative risk factors for complications after spine surgery in
patients with cerebral palsy: A retrospective case-control study

## Motivation

## Intended Final Products

## Anticipated Data Sources

We will conduct a retrospective cohort study. We will use available data
from the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program Pediatric
database, years 2016-2017. This database captures a random sample of
major surgical procedures over 8 day cycles, and is maintained by a
highly trained clinical reviewer at over 100 children’s hospitals
nationwide. We will be able to study 7988 patients who underwent spinal
fusion for an underlying spinal deformity of various causes, 830 of whom
required surgery for a deformity related to cerebral palsy. We have
access to over 100 perioperative variables including patient
characteristics and comorbidities, deformity type, preoperative
laboratory studies, surgical complexity (including number of levels
fused, operative duration), intraoperative management (blood
transfusion, use of antifibrinolytic drugs), and numerous postoperative
outcomes (including intensive care unit and overall hospital length of
stay, wound infection, pneumonia, mechanical ventilation, cardiac
arrest, stroke, neurologic dysfunction, readmission after discharge,
reoperation, death).

## Planned Analyses / Visualizations / Coding Challenges

We plan to perform basic descriptive statistics (counts, means, medians)
as well as perform univariable and multivariable logistic regression. We
will explore the following visualizations:

*Table 1 Cohort characteristics: demographics, preoperative and surgical
factors*

*Table 2: Univariable comparison of characteristics between those with
and without complications (individual, where possible, and composite) –
odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals, p-values*

*Table 3: Multivariable logistic regression of composite complication
outcome, using any peri/intraoperative variables associated with risk of
complication in Table 2.*

*Plot 1: 2 Panel Box-plot displaying mean length of stay (ICU and
overall hospital) between those with and without most common
complications.*

*Plot 2: Bar chart displaying fraction of overall spinal fusion
population with most common complications compared with fraction of CP
spinal fusion population experiencing each complication.*

We anticipate the following coding challenges: missing data, improbable
data, inconsistent assignment of numeric vs. character variables from
one year of study data to another, as well as rarity of certain adverse
events leading to low study power.

## Planned Timeline

We aim to complete data import and cleaning during week 1(lead: Lisa
Eisler). Exploratory analyses to take place week 2(lead: Jerri Chen).
Formal analyses and creation of data tables and plots week 3-4(lead:
Katherine Dimitrpopoulou). Written report and webcast to be completed
week 4 (lead: Lisa Eisler and Jerri Chen, edited by Katherine
Dimitropoulou).
